JUDY WOODRUFF: For thousands of
young veterans
in America, putting the wars in
Afghanistan
and Iraq behind them remains a
constant challenge.
For some, starting a family is
an important
part of the healing process.
But, as the "NewsHour"'s William
Brangham
reports, even that can be a
struggle.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All newlyweds
face challenges,
but Jason and Rachel Hallett
have more challenges
than most. Jason is a triple
amputee. Back
in 2010, at age 19, this young
Marine lost
two legs and an arm when he
stepped on an
IED while on patrol in
Afghanistan.
CPL. JASON HALLETT (RET.), U.S.
Marine Corps:
When 9/11 and everything
happened, I was -- I
had a little bit of interest to
join the military.
But, as soon as that happened,
it just became
-- everything was circling
around me joining
the military.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: After his
injury, barely
clinging to life, and riddled
with infections,
Jason was cared for at U.S.
military facilities
in Germany, Maryland and
California.
He hadn't been in touch with
Rachel since
they dated back in eighth grade.
But, in the
hospital, he found her again on
Facebook.
RACHEL HALLETT, Wife of Jason
Hallett: He
sends me this friend request a
couple years
after I had kind of given up.
And when I saw
what had happened, I just
started crying.
He hadn't posted, like, what
happened. But
he had, like -- his picture
obviously was
different than last time I
remembered him,
and said that he worked for the
Marine Corps,
so I kind of put two pieces
together.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Facebook led
to phone calls,
which led to a visit, and then a
wedding day.
They now live in Windsor,
Colorado. Jason's
studying to be a certified
financial planner.
Rachel baby-sits to make extra
money, but
her full-time job now really is
caring for
Jason, and she gets a small
stipend from the
VA for that work.
What the Halletts want most is
to start a
family. But there's a problem.
RACHEL HALLETT: We had just kind
of been told
that it would probably be a
problem because
of some of his injuries and
where his shrapnel
is. There's tons of shrapnel
everywhere throughout
his body.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Still in your
body today?
CPL. JASON HALLETT: Yes. So,
basically, one
of the pieces had actually
connected itself
to one of my testicles. And so I
now have
to take testosterone injections
basically
to get me back to normal. And
with that, one
of the side effects is, it
basically kills
the sperm off.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In order to
conceive a child,
the Halletts have to go through
lengthy in
vitro fertilization treatments.
In vitro is
an expensive process. It
typically costs about
$12,000 to $13,000 per try, and
the first
try often doesn't work, nor does
the second.
So the bills can stack up. But,
unlike all
the other medical treatment
related to Jason's
injuries, the VA doesn't cover
IVF treatment
for wounded vets, and so the
young couple
are paying for this themselves.
Congress passed a law in 1992
that led to
the Veterans Administration
banning coverage
of any in vitro fertilization
services. That
means that for an estimated
1,800 veterans
like Jason, they will also have
to spend tens
of thousands of dollars to get
pregnant and
start a family.
Senator Patty Murray wants that
to change.
This Democrat from Washington
state sits on
the Senate Veterans Affairs
Committee, and
she wrote a bill that would lift
the VA's
IVF ban. But for six years, her
efforts have
been blocked.
SEN. PATTY MURRAY (D),
Washington: To me,
when someone goes off to fight a
war for us,
a man or a woman, we have an
obligation as
the country to make them whole
again, as whole
as we can. And, certainly,
having a family,
having children, having that
kind of quality
of life that a lot of Americans
want is something
that we should make sure they
get.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Why is it that
the VA doesn't
pay for these services now?
SEN. PATTY MURRAY: I have been
told that it
is because of the cost. I
believe that that
shouldn't be an issue. This is
something that
is a cost of war and that, as
Americans, we
should do what we can for the
people who served
our country. So, the stated
reason is money,
but I'm skeptical.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: What do you
think the issue
it really is?
SEN. PATTY MURRAY: It is hard to
get anyone
to say anything past cost. I
would say to
them, let's get over the cost.
If there's
another issue, tell us what it
is.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, what is
the cost? One
estimate says covering IVF and
other fertility
treatments for veterans for five
years would
be $578 million. Some IVF
advocates say that
estimate is inflated.
We reached out to the two
Republicans who
run the Veterans Affairs
Committees in the
House and the Senate. Neither
would speak
with us. Republican Congressman
Jeff Miller
from Florida, chairman of the
House VA Committee,
gave us a statement saying he
was trying to
balance the needs of veterans
with the concerns
over IVF.
Several sources told the
"NewsHour" that these
concerns over IVF apparently
come from pro-life
organizations who object to the
treatments.
These groups argue that, because
some of the
embryos created or stored during
IVF sometimes
get destroyed, IVF is then
similar to abortion.
We reached out to the main
pro-life groups
to talk about their concerns,
but they all
declined our requests.
SEN. PATTY MURRAY: What I would
answer to
that is that this is a decision
each one of
these men and woman have to make
on their
own. And if they decide this is
the way that
they can have a family and
become whole again,
that decision should be up to
them.
But our country shouldn't be
deciding for
one philosophy, if it's a
religious philosophy,
a ban on all Americans who
served our country
in having the ability to have a
child.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It appears
unlikely Congress
will change the VA's policy
before the next
election. But for young veterans
and their
families who struggle to afford
IVF, time
is very short.
DR. GILBERT MOTTLA, Shady Grove
Fertility:
We're really talking about some
1,800 Iraq
and Afghanistan veterans who are
now aging.
This one group of war injured,
we really need
to move this legislation forward
and get these
individuals the coverage they
need before
they lose their own reproductive
potential.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Doctor Gilbert
Mottla is
a fertility doctor in Maryland
who works with
military families. He's pushing
the VA to
change its policy, which he says
is driven
in part by misconceptions about
IVF, like
the concern that IVF causes
multiple pregnancies
at once, leading to selective
abortions.
DR. GILBERT MOTTLA: I think it
really is a
misunderstanding of what the
procedure is
about. And it generates -- goes
back to the
early '90s, when in vitro was
very, very new.
This is a 34-year-old procedure
now that has
come of age tactically.
And back in the early '90s, when
Congress
was looking at this, it was a
new procedure,
not very successful, fraught
with some problems
of multiple pregnancy, which
really are over
in many ways.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: There's no
sign Jason Hallett
is at all frustrated with the
injuries he's
suffered and what they have done
to his life,
but the same isn't true for the
way he feels
about Congress.
What do you think about the
people who have
been holding this piece of
legislation up?
CPL. JASON HALLETT: It's very
angering. And
it brings a lot of resentment
towards my active
service and stuff. I don't
regret joining
the Marine Corps. But the simple
fact is that
they told us that we'd be taken
care of us
if we got injured.
And I guarantee that, if it was
a congressman's
kid or them themselves that
wanted IVF, and
they had to go through the same
process and
the same hoops, that they would
be doing everything
they can to make it happen.
RACHEL HALLETT: It's hard to
know that he
would protect them and he would
give up all
of this for them, and they will
not take just
a little bit of time to try to
fix this issue
that we are having.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Rachel is
undergoing the
first steps of her fertility
treatment. If
all goes well, she could be
pregnant as early
as February. If it doesn't, they
will probably
need loans for any additional
treatment.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham
in Windsor, Colorado.